Merci.
-[Anne] ♪ Cordelia ♪
-[sighs]
-♪ Nothing rhymes with your name ♪
-Not going to school again today?
♪ There's no need to be ashamed ♪
♪ Even though you're strange and plain ♪
♪ Cordelia
Nothing rhymes with your name ♪
♪ But don't be ashamed ♪
♪ Even though you're strange and plain ♪
Isn't she supposed
to be collecting the eggs?
[Marilla]
If she doesn't go back to school soon,
you may have to send us both
to the loony bin.
♪ Dah, dah, dah, dah ♪
♪ First thing we'd climb a tree ♪
♪ And maybe then we'd talk ♪
♪ Or sit silently ♪
♪ And listen to our thoughts ♪
♪ With illusions of someday ♪
♪ Casting a golden light ♪
♪ No dress rehearsal ♪
♪ This is our life ♪
♪ You are ahead by a century ♪
-♪ This is our life ♪
-♪ You are ahead by a century ♪
[Anne] Hello, little miss.
And you'll need to test the pie's doneness
with a small knife.
I will.
Watch the clock carefully, Anne,
so as not to burn it.
I will.
I don't want to return from Rachel's
to find Green Gables a smoldering ruin.
-I will.
-What?
I mean, I won't. I-I-I mean, it won't.
Don't worry, I'll go right in.
"Ladybug, ladybug, fly away home.
Your house is on fire,
and your children are home."
-Anne!
-I'm going!
"All except one and that's little Ann,
for she crept under the frying pan."
[blows]
[Marilla] And I'm at my wits' end.
Well, since you've asked
for my advice, Marilla...
I would humor her a little while longer.
You really think it's better
she continue to stay at home?
Yes. That is, I wouldn't say school again
till she's said it herself.
And she will.
She won't be underfoot forever.
Truth is I'm torn.
Bright as she is,
she had such a difficult start in life,
she isn't always...
well, equipped for certain things.
More's the pity.
She had such a longing for school.
Bide your time, I'm telling you.
Anne is a clever one and all.
Too clever by half.
She'll go back,
that's for sure and certain.
It's hard to have lofty ideas
when you're stuck in the kitchen all day.
-Speak for yourself.
-[chuckles]
She'll soon cool off in a week or so.
"Or so"?
Patience.
Mark my words. Soon enough,
she'll go back of her own accord.
God willing.
I think this length is fetching, Griselda.
Yes.
Yes, this will do nicely for dancing.
Perhaps you can fashion a small loop
at the hem, so I can lift the train.
I do so appreciate
all your careful attentions, Griselda.
I think it's ever so important
to give credit where credit is due.
How awful it would be
to be in service of those
who neglect you or treat you unkindly.
I can imagine that it would make you
feel quite small and hopeless.
And occasionally despairing
and lacking in confidence.
I wonder if those feelings ever go away.
I'll take tea in the library, Griselda.
Today, I'm going to climb the ladder
to reach the loneliest book
on the highest shelf.
Oh, dear God! Anne!
Marilla? Oh, the pie!
-[Marilla] Oh!
-[pots clattering]
-Out of the way!
-I'm sorry! Marilla, I'm so sorry!
-I forgot!
-I am aware!
Don't just stand there with your teeth
in your head! Open the door!
Oh! Pfft.
-[panting]
-[Marilla] Oh!
Fetch the slop bucket.
Oh, I'm not sure
this is even fit for pigs!
I'm very sorry, Marilla.
I meant to watch the clock, truly I did.
I was having the most delightful daydream.
Your mind is idle, Anne!
It isn't idle at all.
I was imagining
that I'm wise Princess Cordelia,
and I only have to touch a book
to know its contents.
This has gone on long enough.
No one thinks she's strange. In fact,
she's embraced for being different.
-Life is not magic, Anne.
-I know.
You can't just wish yourself away!
I'm raising you, and I know what's best.
It's high time you went back to school.
Please don't make me, Marilla.
Please! I can't face that.
-I promise I'll do better here. I promise.
-You can stop your bargaining,
-'cause there's no use in it.
-Matthew said I didn't have to go back!
What now?
He understands that school
is a torment for me.
But of course he'd understand.
He's a kindred spirit!
I don't have any friends!
-You've got Diana.
-No!
She can't like me when no one else does.
Don't you see?
-Calm yourself!
-And Gil...
Well, there's a boy whose sole purpose
in life is to humiliate me.
-Stuff and nonsense!
-[shouts] I don't fit in!
You are going back to school tomorrow,
and that's final.
[sobs]
[cows mooing]
Matthew Cuthbert,
the time has come to end this foolishness.
I have allowed you to interfere
and coddle that child!
I was only sympathizing.
Did we or did we not agree
that her raising is up to me?
I-I didn't mean to put my oar in.
I hate it when she's upset, is all.
Well, I hope you're happy,
'cause she's inside right now
waltzing around a smoldering kitchen!
She does seem to be
a bit at sixes and sevens.
A bit?
She almost burnt down our home!
-[man] Move, you little scarecrow!
-[woman] Nothing but a piece of trash!
[girl] Don't worry, Anne.
I'll always be your friend.
We have each other.
Katie?
Katie, is that you?
[exhales, sniffles]
Katie Maurice?
[clock ticking]
[sobs] Are you in there?
Please, Katie.
Please.
I'm sorry I had to leave you
at Mrs. Hammond's.
You have no idea how grateful I'd be
if you'd visit me here.
Katie?
[sobs]
[Marilla]
Idle hands are the Devil's workshop.
So, if it's all right with you,
even though you know best,
I would like to suggest
that she return to school tomorrow!
[cow mooing]
[bell ringing]
[door opens]
What brings you inside this time of day?
What is it you need, Matthew?
I...
I'll take a coffee.
At three in the afternoon?
Or-Or tea.
Tea will be ready at four,
just like every other day.
Right, then.
She'll get used to school soon enough.
Same as all the other children.
But...
But what?
Anne's not like the others.
You're too soft with her, Matthew.
We'll not ask her too many questions
when she gets back. Can we agree on that?
I don't want to open a can of worms.
She'll learn to like it, and that's that.
-[Matthew] Afternoon.
-[door opens]
Anne.
-[door closes]
-Anne.
I'm sure you're wondering
how the school day went.
I'm pleased to report
it wasn't as bad as I thought.
-I enjoyed myself.
-[exhales]
Well, that's just fine.
Do you not have homework?
Where are your books?
Oh, I didn't need
to bring them home today.
I'll go put this down on the bench.
Hello, Katie.
I brought you your favorite flower.
It's a wild rose.
[clock ticking]
Katie, I wish you were here.
[Marilla] Come along, Anne.
[seagulls squawking]
[rooster crows]
Well, my bed's all made.
May I take an extra apple, Marilla,
in case I have a friend to share it with?
Help yourself.
Isn't it wonderful that every day
can be an adventure?
-You're chipper this morning.
-It all depends on how you look at things.
Well, I'm all ready for school.
I'll just go fetch my hat.
I'm expecting to learn about
the District of Saskatchewan today.
Isn't "Saskatchewan"
just the most delicious name to say?
I'd like to go there someday.
It's exciting to learn about
all the places one might go.
I think the Prairies hold a lot of appeal.
Well, time to go. Goodbye, Marilla.
I hope you don't envy me too much in this
time of great learning in my young life.
-[Anne exhales]
-[door opens, closes]
[cows mooing]
[footsteps approaching]
Anne stays so late in school.
She enjoys it now?
It seems she does.
Thank you.
Hello, ladies.
Hello.
[knock on door]
[Diana] Good afternoon, Miss Cuthbert.
Good afternoon, Diana.
This is Miss Ruby Gillis.
-Hello.
What brings you both by?
We thought Anne might like
to have her books and everything.
-Nice to meet you. Come on, Diana.
-We've been worrying about her.
Isn't that right, Ruby?
Diana especially.
Did something happen?
[Diana] Anne's suffering, isn't she?
I just know it.
Anne is too sensitive for this world.
That's what she told me once, anyway.
Is she truly never coming back to school?
If she's not,
then we can sit together, Diana.
When did you last see her?
It's been days and days.
I never imagined she wouldn't come back.
Neither did I.
May we say hello to her?
Anne is running an errand at present,
but I'll be sure
to tell her you were here.
Please do, Miss Cuthbert.
Please tell Anne we miss her very much.
You can count on it.
[Anne] "The name 'Saskatchewan'
originated with the Plains Indians.
Their word was 'kisiskatchewan'
meaning the 'river that flows swiftly,'
in reference to the most important
waterways running through their territory,
the North and South Saskatchewan rivers."
I love the way that native names always
mean something specific, don't you?
I wonder what my name would be
if I was a North American native.
"Fire-haired Dreamer"?
Or maybe...
"She Who Speaks With Trees"?
Or...
I know.
"Kindred Spirit." That could work.
What's that, dear Griselda?
[exhales]
Yes. You're right, as usual.
[exhales] It's getting late,
and your princess must away to her castle.
I'll see you in the bright
and shiny morning, dear students.
Sorry I'm late.
There was just so much to learn.
How was the District of Saskatchewan?
Oh, fascinating.
I had another excellent day.
I learned so much, and I imagine
Mr. Phillips was quite impressed, and...
[Marilla] And she lied.
And then lied some more.
Right to our faces.
I've been doing my best
to teach her right from wrong,
but, well, this matter is so grave
that we knew we had to bring it to you.
Indeed, indeed.
You did right.
It's a very good thing I'm here.
God frowns on fibbing, young lady.
I imagine He does.
I see now how truly wrong I was.
Wrong and disrespectful.
-I assure you, Minister, I am full of woe.
-Yes.
And also dismay.
With a good measure of chagrin.
I can only hope that it pleases God
to know how truly unhappy I am.
-Does it?
-That is something you must pray on.
Now, Anne, you must always remember,
honesty is the best policy.
Honesty isn't actually a policy,
though, is it?
I beg your pardon?
-Anne!
-Well, I believe that--
I see now what you're up against.
It doesn't matter what you think.
About anything?
-Or--?
-Do you agree never to lie again?
-Is a lie of omission really a lie?
-You see? She's not sorry!
I am sorry, Marilla.
I truly am sorry for vexing you, and for--
-You said you were going to school.
-I went, in a fashion.
-Do you take us for fools?
-But they hate me there!
Enough!
You must learn to harness yourself.
I see what the problem is here.
Oh, yes, I do, indeed.
And I have divined an answer.
This problem is easily solved.
If the girl doesn't want to go to school,
then she shouldn't go.
She should stay home, and learn
proper housekeeping until she marries.
And then the Lord God said:
"It is not good that the man
should be alone.
I will make him a helper fit for him."
There's no need for her
to bother with an education.
Every young woman
should learn how to be a good wife.
I don't know quite what I expected
the minister to say,
but I assure you it wasn't that.
I fear preparing myself to be a wife
will be a powerful challenge
for you, Marilla.
-[exhales]
-Uh...
Admittedly, I'm very homely and clumsy.
It'll be a big surprise to both of us
if I marry someday. I never expected to.
But if God decrees it--
Will you please go in the barn
and see if anything needs doing?
I need to hear myself think.
[exhales]
Marilla wants me
to find some outdoor chores to do.
Jerry's in the loft.
He'll tell you what needs doing.
You're so lucky to be a boy, Jerry.
Boys can do anything they want.
And boys have every opportunity.
You can go to school if you want.
Wait. Does that mean school's
out of the question for you?
-Where do you think I'd rather be?
-I hadn't really thought about it.
There's so many things
I hadn't thought of before today.
I don't see how
I'm ever gonna be a good wife.
-Probably not.
-I have such a bad temper.
-True.
-And I'm wicked.
And impatient and skinny and homely.
Don't say anything, Jerry.
I never thought that a wife
is what I would be.
[sighs]
[horse neighs]
There have to be other options.
What do you want to be?
I do this.
But what if, what if
I was a published author?
What if I were in command of an army,
like Joan of Arc?
Or if I became an explorer
and discovered new lands? [chuckles]
I don't need school
for any of those things.
Why aren't you answering my question?
My brother's apprentice as a blacksmith.
The other learns to become a butcher.
I could be a smithy, I suppose.
But what do you want, Jerry?
You could be a cartographer
or an aviator.
You could even lead a safari.
-I don't know what you're talking about.
-Come on, Jerry! Use your imagination!
No, seriously,
I don't know any of those words.
Oh.
Well, you get the idea.
And I'm not sure about you, but suddenly
I feel absolutely ablaze with possibility!
Or you could just go to school,
because you can.
Go find something else to do.
[squawking]
[door opens]
[Rachel] Hello?
[door closes]
Marilla?
What are you doing?
You know the stove's gone cold?
My, my.
This is unlike you.
I have no idea what's like me.
None at all.
I'll light the stove.
I... I suppose your mind
is burdened, then.
By the minister's visit.
Oh, everything is just peaches and cream,
thank you for asking.
Now, is there anything I can bake
or clean or mend or fetch for you?
[owl hooting]
[bell ringing in distance]
[door slams]
[bell continues ringing]
Marilla!
What's happening?
There's a fire in town.
Put on your boots and hurry down.
Fetch the cellar buckets.
We'll slop the pigs on our way.
Quick, like a bunny!
Quick, quick!
Fetch every bucket you can find.
Hold them still with blankets.
[horse neighs]
Bring the lantern.
-[Matthew] Keep those buckets coming!
-[woman] Pass these down the line!
-[man] Hurry! Hurry!
-We need more buckets!
[shouting]
-This is the Gillis' house.
-[glass smashing]
Oh, poor Ruby.
[shouts continue]
-[horse whinnies]
-[man 1] Grab the ladder! Hurry up!
[man 2] Hurry! Hurry! Go! Go!
[man 3] Get the horses out!
[shouting]
[man 3] Run to our place
and get some more buckets!
[man 2] Pass these down the line!
[Diana] Anne!
Anne!
-[girls gasping]
-Oh, I've missed you so much!
-[glass shatters]
-[screams]
-[man 1] Window's blown!
-[Gilbert] Stand clear!
-Out of the way!
-[man 2] Give us a hand with the ladder!
Hurry up! Hurry up!
[man 2] Hurry, hurry!
Get some buckets for Gilbert!
[woman] Go, go!
[man 1] Where's the fire wagon?
All right! Let's go, let's go!
[man 2] It's on its way!
It's burning so fierce. Is everyone out?
Uh, yeah. That's the Gillis family
over there. You see Ruby?
[Gilbert] Hey!
Keep the water coming! Come on!
Why are the doors and windows open?
[Gilbert] We need more water!
[bell ringing]
[woman] Watch out!
-What?
-[man] Make way!
[woman] It's the fire wagon!
[man]
Stand back! Fire wagon! Stand back!
[Gilbert] Come on, let's go!
Anne?
[man] Get back! Get back!
No! Anne!
Anne!
Anne! Anne!
[panting]
[coughing]
Anne!
[Diana] Anne!
-[Marilla] What is it?
-It's Anne! It's Anne!
What's happened to Anne? Anne!
[Diana] She ran inside!
-Let me go! I need to get Anne!
-No!
[coughing]
-Anne!
-No!
-No, let me go! I need to get Anne!
-No! Marilla! Stay here!
[Marilla] Is that her?
Oh, my God!
All right, it's slowing down!
We can do this! Keep 'em coming!
[gasping, coughs]
Where is she?
I don't understand. Where is she?
-[Rachel] Dear God in heaven.
-[Diana] Anne!
[horse neighs]
[coughs]
[man] Somebody help over here!
Mr. Cuthbert! Mr. Cuthbert, help!
[coughs]
Shaft's given way.
Lift it off. Other end. Just lift.
Quick, quick, quick, quick, quick.
[woman] "Hallowed be thy name.
Thy kingdom come, Thy will be done,
on earth, as it is in heaven.
Give us this day our daily bread,
and forgive us our trespasses,
-as we forgive those who trespass..."
-Anne!
Anne! Anne! Oh, Anne!
[Diana] Oh, Anne!
-[Marilla] Oh, Anne!
-[Rachel] Oh!
Find out what's happened.
[Marilla] Anne!
-[Rachel] Oh, she's all right!
-Sorry. I'm all right.
She's all right.
What were you thinking?
-Did it help?
-Why ever did you run inside?
[Jerry] She ran inside!
-Did it slow it down?
-What were you thinking?
Fire... fire needs oxygen.
Closing windows and doors deprives it.
Oh, my word!
[Jerry] Anne slowed down the fire!
However do you know that?
It was Anne! She did it!
[baby crying]
The fire manual in the orphanage.
There wasn't much else to read.
-[coughs]
-Oh, here, here.
[chuckling]
And we thank Thee, O Lord,
for your mercy.
"And of some have compassion,
making a difference.
Others save with fear,
pulling them out of the fire,
hating even the garment spotted
by the flesh.
Now unto Him that is able
to keep you from falling
and to present you faultless
before the presence of His glory
with exceeding joy..."
Maybe you could be a firefighter.
...we thank thee for watching over us
and keeping all in our community safe
from harm.
Praise be to God Almighty.
All right, it's settled.
The Gillis family will be billeted out
to the Barrys, the Cuthberts
and ourselves.
All the men pulling together, we figure
the major repairs will take about a week.
Sounds about right.
Jerry and I will put things right
at Green Gables
and be back as soon as we can.
As will I.
I'll bring as many hands as I can spare.
Thank you.
What a thing.
-What a thing.
-We'll get it squared away. Never fear.
We owe you all a great debt of thanks.
Especially dear Anne.
Risking your life for us,
and taking such quick action.
And, ladies, thank you kindly
for agreeing to take the children.
Especially since school won't be
in session. You'll have your hands full.
Ruby? Come here, please.
It's no trouble at all.
We're happy to have her.
Now, Anne and Ruby
can get to know each other better.
What? No. Mother!
-Ruby...
-I don't want to stay there.
-My, my.
-[Mrs. Gillis] Calm yourself.
-Why can't I stay with Diana?
-That's enough! The plan is set.
I'll never live it down!
Please don't make me!
[Mrs. Gillis]
I won't have any more of this.
After this evening you should be grateful
to have a bed to sleep in at all.
Hear, hear.
[Mrs. Gillis] I apologize.
It doesn't matter
what the other girls think, Ruby.
It matters what you think.
And I, for one,
think Anne is marvelous and brave.
I'll visit soon, all right?
It's all right. Don't worry.
I'm sure no one
will think you're my friend.
I reckon we should be off.
[fire crackles]
Now, I'd like the two of you
to go upstairs to bed for a few hours.
You both need rest
after that terrible night.
I can help you, Marilla.
I should fetch the eggs.
You can, but you won't.
Now, up to bed with both of you.
Anne, please see to it
that your guest is comfortable.
Come along, Ruby.
I have a lovely gable room,
and the cherry tree is ever so friendly.
[sobs]
My first night here in this room,
I cried as you do now.
Try as I might, there was no hope
for my imagination that cold night.
Princess Cordelia was nowhere to be found.
Princess Cordelia?
Well...
she's a wise and solitary princess.
She wears dresses of the finest silk,
and velvet with puff sleeves
and ever so many flounces.
One day...
Princess Cordelia arrived at
the most beautiful kingdom in the world.
She knew not a soul,
and was worried no one would like her.
All my dresses will be ruined
from the smoke!
You can borrow one of mine. I have two.
A week really isn't that long when you
plan out all the things you want to do.
Maybe start by imagining what color
you want your room to be.
I know for a fact that it's good
to have things to look forward to.
I've always been partial
to robin's egg blue. [chuckles]
What color do you like?
Pink would also be divine.
I never usually think of pink.
Being as I'm so redheaded,
it's out of the question.
But you would look so pretty
in a pink room.
[exhales]
We'll stay busy. I'm learning to bake.
We can make some biscuits for the boys,
while they work.
You can see Gilbert.
Diana thought
he cut quite a heroic figure
putting out the blaze on your behalf.
On my behalf?
I hadn't really thought of it like that.
Well, I didn't notice, of course.
I am not a Gilbert Blythe fan.
I shall never forgive his insult,
and I shall never be dissuaded
from my low opinion of him.
That's a good idea about the biscuits.
It's a shame you're not in school anymore.
You seem awful smart about things.
It's best for everyone that I'm not there.
[sighs deeply]
[indistinct chatter]
-I'll need a hand framing this up.
-Here!
Put your backs into it, boys!
[hammering]
Here you go. How many would you like?
Afternoon, Minister.
I'm learning to bake.
Would you care for a scone?
Oh, I don't mind if I do. [chuckles]
Oh, this is some heavy work.
Hey, look, it's the freak
and her new twin sister.
As long as they bring food,
I don't care if it's Quasimodo.
-Oh!
-[Anne] Ruby!
[chuckles]
-[Billy] That was great!
-[Anne] Ruby, are you all right?
-[Ruby sobs]
-[Billy chuckles]
[Anne] Ruby...
Girls are so useless. Guess you should
have stayed home in the kitchen, eh?
What is wrong with you?
Go home and bake cookies!
Headline: they already did.
This is Ruby's property,
or did you forget?
Why don't you shove off,
and leave the men to their work?
Why don't you give me that hammer
and I'll finish the job myself,
if you're too busy being a bully
to get it done?
[laughter]
Hey, here.
You all right?
There you are.
-Thank you, Gilbert.
-Yeah.
Of course. Thanks for, um,
coming by to help feed the beasts.
-[Matthew] Much obliged.
-You're welcome.
Matthew, will you please
bring the basket home later?
[Matthew] I better,
if I know what's good for me.
[Gilbert] Um...
Come on, Ruby. Let's get you home.
You're right, Minister.
Honesty is the best policy.
And it's also very satisfying.
Well, I-I-I-I...
Gilbert is so chivalrous.
Well, he's something, all right.
[Anne grunts]
That was, uh, quite the incident...
uh, up there at the Gillis house today.
Nothing beats a redhead for a temper.
Oh...
I meant you being as brave as you were.
Oh.
If you were a boy, oh,
that would have ended up in fisticuffs.
I wouldn't have minded.
Billy Andrews is a coward
who deserves a sock in the kisser.
-I could take him.
-Oh...
Not if you don't...
protect the nose.
-Oh!
-Oh, oh!
You're pretty good!
You've been taking lessons on the sly?
-[chuckles, gasps]
-Oh!
Just call me Avonlea Ace!
-You're a natural. Nose, nose, nose!
-Huh, huh!
[chuckles] Huh!
-Huh!
-Oh, gee!
[birds chirping, squawking]
[Anne] The inaugural meeting of
the Avonlea Story Club is now in session!
Oh, Anne, this is so... so...
Deliciously secret
and scrumptiously exciting?
[chuckles] You have such a way with words.
-I hardly know what you're saying.
-Thank you.
Now before we begin
cultivating our imaginations,
each of us should pick our nom de plume.
-See? It's happened again.
-[Diana chuckles]
A nom de plume is a pen name
for purposes of anonymity.
I shall be writing under the name
of Rosamond Montmorency.
Oh, that gives me such a thrill!
Once a week, we'll read
our completed stories aloud to each other
and talk them over thoughtfully.
[Diana exhales]
I can't think of anything!
I've got heaps of ideas
if you need a little prompting.
How about a tale of romance
most divine and tragical?
[Diana chuckles]
[yawns]
I can't believe
I move back into my house tomorrow.
And school will start again.
Everything will be made right.
I'll miss you, Anne.
[door creaks]
[inhales, exhales]
[sighs]
[floorboards creaking]
[door opens]
I thought you'd like to know
that Ruby has gone to sleep.
Well, thank you, Anne.
It's handy
that she can fall asleep so easily.
She needs her rest, seeing as how
she's going home tomorrow,
and school will start again soon.
Mm-hm.
I'm in a quandary.
It worries me what the minister said.
Not the not fibbing part.
He was right about that.
It's the not going to school
and being a wife part.
I've been pondering about that, too.
His thinking seems
a mite old-fashioned to me.
What do you think?
Well, it doesn't provide much scope
for the imagination,
that's for sure and certain.
You know, it seems to me
you should decide for yourself...
what you want to do and be
and set your mind to it.
Maybe school wouldn't be so bad,
now that I have Diana and Ruby.
You've got a good and nimble mind, Anne.
I don't see why you should limit it.
In my day, we didn't get to choose.
I think you should make your own decision.
[Anne exhales]
[clock ticking]
[Anne sighs]
Goodbye, dear Katie.
[indistinct conversations]
[chattering]
[Mr. Phillips] Settle down.
Don't make me ask you again.
Open your readers to chapter 12.
When I turn around,
you best have your readers open.
-It's Anne!
-[class gasps]
She's here!
Anne!
I've missed you so much!
[Mr. Phillips]
Anne Shirley-Cuthbert, take your seat.
[exhales deeply]